[PMM-275] OAS Hub: Security (#39)
speakeasy-api/developer-docs: openapi/security/security-schemes/security-http.mdx

---
title: HTTP Basic in OpenAPI
description: "Implement Basic authentication using Security Schemes in your OpenAPI specification for better security, developer experience, and seamless integration."
---

import { Table } from "@/mdx/components";

# HTTP Security Scheme in OpenAPI

> The `http` security scheme is one of the most commonly used schemes because it covers anything using the HTTP header `Authorization`, which involves auth schemes like Basic, Digest, and Bearer. The full list of supports auth schemes for `type: http` is outsourced to the [IANA HTTP Authentication Scheme Registry](https://www.iana.org/assignments/http-authschemes/http-authschemes.xhtml).

Reviewer: This sentence needs some smoothing out

    { field: "`bearerFormat`", type: "String", required: "", description: "A hint to the client to identify how the bearer token is formatted. Bearer tokens are usually generated by an authorization server, so this information is primarily for documentation purposes." },
    { field: "`x-*`", type: "[Extensions](/openapi/extensions)", required: "", description: "Any number of extension fields can be added to the security scheme object to be used by tooling and vendors." }
  ]}
  columns={[
    { key: "field", header: "Field" },
    { key: "type", header: "Type" },
    { key: "required", header: "Required" },
    { key: "description", header: "Description" }
  ]}
/>

So for example, a JWT token might look like this:

```yaml
components:
  securitySchemes:
    auth:
      type: http
      scheme: bearer
      bearerFormat: JWT
security:
  - auth: []
```

## HTTP Basic

The Basic security scheme is a simple authentication mechanism baked into the HTTP protocol that supports sending an `Authorization` header containing a base64 encoded username and password.

```http
GET /secrets

Authorization: Basic dXNlcjpwYXNzd29yZA==
```

> Basic is relatively simple mechanism to get started with, but risks leaking easy-to-decode passwords if used incorrectly. The example above is literally just `base64("user:password")`, but can fool some developers into thinking its actually encrypted or secret somehow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Basic is relatively simple mechanism to get started with, but risks leaking easy-to-decode passwords if used incorrectly. The example above is simply `base64("user:password")`, but can fool some developers into thinking its actually encrypted or secret.
```

> Much like API keys, another issue with Basic is that its generally working with long-lived credentials, and if intercepted these can be used by malicious actors until the credentials are revoked or expire.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Much like API keys, another issue with Basic is that it's generally working with long-lived credentials, and if intercepted, these can be used by malicious actors until the credentials are revoked or expire.
```

> For these reasons it is generally best to avoid HTTP basic.

Reviewer: Let's also standardize the capitalization of Basic!
